# Collaboration (and a note on obligation)

Once your package gets noticed you'll very likely have someone use it
and find something they think should be changed. Maybe there's a bug, or
something isnt' documented or isnt' working how the docs say it is, or
they want to add a neat feature. Sometmies they'll email you, sometimes
add an issue or pull reuqest on yoru public repo.

## Entitlement & obligation

There's been a lot of words written about the feeling of entitlement
many users of free and open source software feel. They want to know why
something isn't moving fast enough for them, or why a feature they like
hasn't been added. ANd of course this sense of entitlement is not
justified. The software is provided free without wrranty, and they're
not paying you to keep it up.

That said, I do think there's a slight difference between simply
publishng your work and publishing it to a public package index. If I
publish something on Github and then someone says, this is wrong you
should change, well, okay, maybe I will maybe I won't. I just put it on
Github - on my Github account no less - so that I could download it
somewhere else andhave a backup of my work hsitory on it. I don't care
that you use it.

But if I publish it to PyPI it's either a) because I want other people
to be able to use it and to do so or b) I'm simply taking advantage of
free package hosting.

If the reason is b) then at the very least make it clear what your
expectations are. But if it's a) then expectatiosn change. I don't think
you have an obligation to merge every pull request and add every feature
- far from it! But you do have something of an obligation to address
bugs and to explain why you aren't going to add a new feature. If you
don't want to do this take your package out of the public namespace.

## Let the world know

Put it on Django Packages.
