---
title: "Using devpi for local PyPI mirroring"
subtitle: "Faster installs and testing from the cached lane"
layout: post
permalink: /why-use-devpi/
category: programming
soHelpful: true
published: true
comments: true
teaser: >
    Depending on a remote packaging system for testing or deployment sucks. Even
    with mirrors you're at the mercy of server uptime, network latency, and
    your own connection. devpi is a multifacted tool that takes a lot of
    this pain away for Python development.
---

PyPI *never* goes down, right? Well, even if it doesn't, running a fresh
build on a Python library - in say, multiple test environments - or
reprovisioning a virtual environment means dependence at least on a
remote system.

A better solution is to use a local mirror. That's where [devpi](http://doc.devpi.net/latest/) comes in.

### Cached mirroring, only what you use

Instead of attempting to mirror all of the packages on the package
index, which seems to be the goal of a lot of package mirror systems,
devpi primarily serves as a caching proxy to the Python package index.
When you download a package using pip (or easy_install, as it were),
devpi it caches a copy of the package so that the next time you
request that package it comes from your local cache.

It does so by running a PyPI compatible server locally. You either
specify this new index on the command line at package install time or -
smarter - updating your [pip
configuration](http://doc.devpi.net/latest/quickstart-pypimirror.html#permanent-index-configuration-for-pip)
to use your new local index.

### Testing and clean installs

One of the most helpful scenarios is testing Python packages. If I'm
writing a Python library I'll configure tox to test it against several
different versions of Python for me. tox manages virtual environments
for each test environment which means it's download and installing
dependencies for each environment.

This is multiplied when you start building a matrix against
Python versions and dependency versions as well.

I run tests for the geocoding libraries I've written against Python 2.7,
3.3, 3.4, and as it fits, PyPy. For Django apps I matrix against various
Django versions as well, so now we're multiplying the number of test
environments which means we're multiplying the number of times every
file must be downloaded.

Now if I run `tox -r` and rebuild the testing environments, all the
packages are downloaded directly from my own machine, rather than from
PyPI. *Much* faster.

### Go get devpi. Now.

Check out the [quickstart
guide](http://doc.devpi.net/latest/quickstart-pypimirror.html) and try
it today.
