---
title: "Requirements and specifications: confusing the why, the how, and the what"
permalink: /requirements-and-specifications/
layout: post
published: true
date: 2015-04-08
teaser: >
    They tried turning specifications into user stories. You'll never
    guess how much money they spent cleaning it up.
---

It starts innocently enough: a few mockups, some user flows, a form that
everyone loves, an application born of high quality design - a beautiful
application that looks exactly like it was supposed to that provides
little of the intended value.

### Specifications: no substitute for requirements

Having spent weeks, months, or possibly even years thinking about the
end product, it's not surprising that clients have a preconceived notion
of exactly what their application is going to look like and exactly how
each part is going to work.

When you put together a project plan and start developing, there are two
typical ways to do it: there are specifications and there are
requirements. Confusing the two is a common mistake in early stage
projects, which is why it is easy to end up with a beautiful application
with little value.

{% include image.html src="/images/horse-and-cart.jpg" alt="Horse and cart, Johann Adam Klein" caption="The project team decides to put the horse first." %}

So just what are the differences between specifications and
requirements? Requirements are the ‘what's necessary' question. What do
you need to do? Specifications are the ‘how.' How are you going to do
that?

### The destination is not the route

Consider this scenario. You're out on the street in Istanbul preparing
to head to the Istanbul Modern to take in some Turkish art prior to
leaving the next day. It seems fairly far away and you don't have your
own car, so you find a taxi to get there.

The first thing you do after getting in the taxi is to tell the driver
where you want to go. You've seen the map and which streets offer the
most direct route, so you may decide to tell the driver what roads to
take to reach your destination. At that point, you may find yourself
sitting in a traffic jam, which would have been avoided if you had
allowed the driver to take his preferred route, the route that went
around the traffic that he knew to expect.

{% include image.html src="/images/istanbul-taxis.jpg" alt="Istanbul taxis, Ben Lopatin" caption="This is not a one-way street." %}

What you're doing in telling the driver the destination is providing
requirements. Requesting a specific route is providing specifications.
If you provide your requirements to the driver, that you want to get to
museum and you'd like to get there by 2 o'clock, then your driver can
take this information, and based on his knowledge of the city and its
traffic patterns, decide what route to take to ensure your requirements
are met. Even with your map of the city and feigned knowledge, your own
specifications will almost certainly fail.

If you happen to know all the winding roads in the city of seven hills
that might work out for you, but chances are pretty good the only
outcome from specifying your route rather than simply providing your
destination is going to be a slower trip, at best.

**Requirements are destinations, specifications are routes.**

### Requirements and goals

It's possible, too, that our driver might have told us that given the
traffic congestion, our limited time, and short distance, that it would
be in our best interest to walk or perhaps to take a different mode of
transport.

On the street in Istanbul, we stopped short in talking only about
requirements. Here we're still relying on the driver as only a technical
expert to decide on and navigate a route through the city's narrow and
congested streets. We arrived on time at the museum but were somewhat
underwhelmed by the museum. Had we discussed our goals with the driver,
there might have been a different final outcome.

Our goal was to enjoy some Turkish art in the one afternoon we had left.
Implicit in this goal is that we want to get the best and most unique
experience in the shortest amount of time. If we knew that our driver
knew something not just about driving cars and about choosing routes
through the city but also about the city itself, including its museums,
we could have added the the goal of our trip.

With the driver's aid, we might have gone to a different museum
altogether. “An afternoon in Istanbul? No, no, you want the Museum of
Islamic Art!” You are skeptical but take the driver's advice anyhow and
you may be surprised by how absorbed one can become just in tiling
alone.

### Making this possible

This kind of discovery is only possible with expertise and trust. To a
consultant it means making sure your clients understand and trust your
expertise, and asking them questions when they specify routes. To a
client it means going beyond specifying a route and explaining where
you're trying to go and also why you're trying to get there.
