---
title: "PyTennesee 2015"
permalink: /pytennessee-2015/
layout: post
published: true
date: 2015-02-15 16:51:59
teaser: Bye Nashville, thanks for all the Pythons!
---

I came, I saw, I spoke. A quick hit of the talk highlights.

### Building Better API Clients

My own talk was on the topic of designing and writing API clients.

<script async class="speakerdeck-embed" data-id="6c3af95405254438a06bace32eb6ae0a" data-ratio="1.33333333333333" src="//speakerdeck.com/assets/embed.js"></script>

I gave a slightly different version of the talk a month later at the
[Richmond API Craft
meetup](http://www.meetup.com/API-Craft-RVA/events/220635022/).

### Function decorators

One of my favorite talks was Bill Israel's talk on function decorators,
appropriately titled "Function Decorators: How Do You Even".

I'm not sure I left this talk having learned much new about decorators -
but this owes to the time I've spent working with decorators and not to
any failure in the talk itself. That said, I enjoyed the talk just the
same - it was fantastically well thought out, well prepared, and well
delivered. It was, in short, the talk I had thought of giving on
function decorators, but far better motivated and organized than the
hypotethical one I'd thought about.

### Testing requests

Ian Cordasco's talk was somewhat related to the topic of my own talk, so
I made sure to sit in. Testing an API client is an important part of
shipping one, this talk, "Cutting Off the Internet: Testing Applications
that Use Requests" covered that exactly.

The upshot is that when you're writing any code that *necessarily* uses
an HTTP-based service, you should be mocking those requests. If you're
using the Python library `requests` then you have a few options, and
Ian's talk here focused on the `vcr` model, specifically `betamax`.
Unlike `httpretty` or `responses` - both of which he mentioned I
specifically called out in my own talk - the `vcr` style actually starts
with a full service call. The tool caches the response, however, in a
source controlled fixture file, so that subsequent calls can be mocked.

The primary difference with this style, implemented using `vcy.py` or
Ian's own `betamax`, is that you don't have to worry about crafting
fixtures or your own mocked responses. There's still room and a need for
"regular" mocking of some sort or another, as certain types of responses
like server errors are pretty hard to arbitrarily get out of the
third-party service in question.

### Yielding to better code

The thesis of James Powell's talk, "Generators will free your mind" was
that Python generators can greatly simplify a lot of code, making it
easier to reason about, more extensible, and often perform better too.

This was another well organized presented talk and I left with a better
understanding of how to make use of generators. There were a number of
good points, but the one that sticks out in my mind is using generators
to, er, free yourself from overspecified argument types. Function
expects a list? Use a generator. Function expects a tuple? Can still use
a generator. As long as your function is actually a generator, you'll
find yourself covered.

### Brown fields and green architectures

Daniel Rocco's talk, "Clean and Green: Pragmatic Architecture Patterns"
went a great way to crystalize some things I'd been thinking
about with regard to working with and refactoring "legacy" code.

The biggest takeaway was one probably familiar to functional
programmers: keep I/O at the out layer of the application rather than
embedded throughout. I've since found that *explicitly* applying this
filter to existing code - where is I/O, and any mutation, at that - to
be one of the most straightforward ways of identifying bottlenecks and
problem code.

One of the lessons I walked away from this talk from was the importance
of spending time with other languages (or technologies in general). When
Daniel talked about pulling I/O out of your code to the surface I
immediately thought of the advice from a Haskell guide on the importance
of separating 'pure' and 'impure', I/O related functions. It's I/O at
the surface and pure functions the rest of the way down. The benefit
even in a non-functional language is code that is easier to test,
certainly, and usually easier to reason about, too.

#### Notes

Bill Israel's decorators talk slides are available on [Speaker
Deck](https://speakerdeck.com/epochblue/python-decorators-how-do-you-even).

{% include image.html src="/images/python-onesie.small.jpg" alt="Python onesie" caption="That niece is going to be styling." %}
