---
title: "Requirements and specifications: confusing the why, the how, and the what"
permalink: /requirements-and-specifications/
layout: post
published: true
date: 2015-03-07 18:14:44
teaser: >
    They tried turning specifications into user stories. You'll never
    guess how much money they spent cleaning it up.
---

It starts innocently enough. A few mockups, some user flows, a form that
everyone loves, an application born of high quality design. A beautiful
application that looks exactly like it was supposed to and providing
little of the intended value.

### Specifications: no substitute for requirements

Confusing specifications and requirements is a common mistake
in early stage projects. Having spent weeks, months or possibly
even years thinking about the end product it's not surprising that
clients have a preconceived notion of exactly what their application is
going to look like, how exactly each part should work.

So and so
wants it to look like this. They really like the feature from this app
or this site and so it's gotta do this. Well of course there may be a
much more structured approach where we've got some wireframes already
and we've got some designs that should make it easier for you to put the
proposal together.

When we put together a project plan and you start developing, there are
two ways to do it: there are specs and requirements. Requirements are
the 'what's necessary' question. What do you need to do? Specifications
are the 'how.' How are you going to do that?

{% include image.html src="/images/horse-and-cart.jpg" alt="Horse and cart, Johann Adam Klein" caption="The project team decides to put the horse first." %}

So just what are the differences between specifications and
requirements?

### The destination is not the route

Consider this scenario. You're out on the street in Istanbul preparing
to head to the Istanbul Modern to take in some Turkish art prior to
leaving the next day. It seems fairly far away and you don't have your
own car, so you find a taxi to get there.

The first thing you probably do after getting in the taxi is tell the
driver where you want to go. You've seen the map and can tell which
streets directly get you there, but you don't need to tell the driver
which roads to take. Or perhaps you do and find yourself sitting in a
traffic jam after arguing with the driver not to take his preferred
route, the one that went around the traffic jam he expected along your
preferred route.

{% include image.html src="/images/istanbul-taxis.jpg" alt="Istanbul taxis, Ben Lopatin" caption="This is not a one-way street." %}

What you're doing in telling the driver the destination
is providing requirements. Requesting a specific
route is providing specifications. Instead you could provide your
requirements to the driver, that you want
to get to museum and you'd like to get there by 2 o'clock. Now your
driver can take this information and based on his knowledge of the city
and its traffic patterns decide what route to take to ensure your
requirements are met. Even with your map of the city and feigned
knowledge your own specifications here almost certainly having failed.

If you happen to know all the winding roads in the city of seven hills that
might work out for you, but chances are pretty good the only outcome
from specifying your route rather than simply providing your destination
is going to be a slower trip, at best.

### Pain points

The costs of doing this wrong, and the payoffs of doing this right
differ in a software project than in a taxi trip.

Or the cost of getting this wrong.

Every project is conceived to solve problems.

As a project owner, you risk a totally failed project, of course. But
catastrphic 

As a consultant, the risk of d
As a consultant it's important to shape a project where you bear any
risk of project succcess.

### Requirements and goals

It's possible, too, that our driver might have told us that given the
traffic congestion, our limited time, and short distance, that it would
be in our interest to walk or perhaps take a different mode of
transport.

In our Instanbul goal we stopped short in talking only about
requirements. Here we're still relying on the driver as only a technical
expert to decide on and navigate a route through the city's narrow and
congested streets. We arrived on time at the museum but were somewhat
underwhelmed by the museum. Had we discussed our *goals* with the driver
this might have been a different outcome. Our goal was to enjoy some
Turkish art in the one afternoon we had left. Implicit in this at least
is that we want to get the best and most unique experience in the
shortest amount of time. If we knew that our driver knew something not
just about driving cars, not just about choosing routes through the
city, but also about the city itself, including it's museums, we could
have added the purpose, the goal of our trip. Now with the driver's aid
we might have gone to a different museum altogether. "An afternoon in
Istanbul? No, no, you want the Muesum of Islamic Art!" We're skeptical -
no human forms! - but take the driver's advice anyhow and are surprised
by how absorbed one can become just in tiling.

How is this possible? It's possible with expertise and trust.

There's an art to knowing when to work at which level, and with what
people, whether employees or contractors. If there's an expertise
mismatch, as in you're an expert and you're working with someone 

### Design prototypes as requirement helpers

Not specs, but be careful in using them.

### Stepping back from specifications

Ideally you start this way in your project.

To be clear specifications in and of themselves are not necessarily a
very-bad-thing. But when they lead a project and when they appear in the
absence of *articulated* project goals and requirements, they need to be
reassesed in light of these things.

So the first step is to plainly articulate the project goals. If you're
spending money on a project you had better be able to clearly justify
why you're doing so!

Think of the difference between deciding where you want to go and how
you want to get there in a city, especially a new city.

Figure out where you want to go. Then how are you going to get there
(the road). Then how you might change direction as needed. Don't specify
the lane you'll drive now. Actually figure out why you want to go there.


> You told the taxi driver what streets to take, instead of where you
> wanted to go. Enjoy the gridlock.

### Bring forth the requirements!

Requirements come in many different shapes. A user story
is an example of a requirement. It's really just a way of formulating a
requirement. Whether or not you do agile scrum or whatever the next
methodology of the moment is going to be, a user store is still a great
way of expressing what needs to be done, and from a user's standpoint it
says something like this type of user - you know an admin user - can get
a report and see who the most active users have been this past month.
And specs says this report is going to have this header here and it's
going to do this, it's going to pull this query.

What happens frequently when you the specs without getting the
requirements, you're not really targeting the actual problem. So specs
need to be developed with everyone on board. In a smaller team, it's
probably going to be you make sure the developers who are doing this are
the ones who are actually involved and the specs are probably...they're
going to...if it's purely backend or they're developing the stuff, it's
going to be they develop as well. If you don't do it with their input,
then now you're creating these arbitrary constraints that may not help
you solve your requirements.

So going back, this carpenter example is a prime example of how this
works. You bring the requirements and youâ€¦.Now, if you don't...there's
two (    ) you might have specs: 1) it's not a very complex job; it's
very simple. You know what? You've got a WordPress site and it's going
to be a blog and you might start spec-ing stuff out here. You're a
designer and it's a known issue: it's a blog. That's what WordPress
does. It's a blogging engine, so you're not worried about well I need to
be able to add a blog post. This is already a given. Now you're spec-ing
it out. Or, if you have a team of engineers, then you need someone else
to actual implement it. And that could be another engineering team, it
could be architects specifying the stuff, but that's how it's going to
work. Or you know maybe it's an API and you're spec-ing out the API and
then someone else is going to build it out.

The issue is that when you start spec-ing first is that it's a much more
rigid process. You can start out with specs and that's a prototype and
it's a loose specification and you can build to it and then you can very
quickly and you can stop and say great, now let's check this out. Does
this work? Does this do what we want it to do? How does it feel? Ok,
let's fix this, let's redo it maybe.

### Why? The project goals

### What? The project requirements

### How? The project specifications

The pedantic reader might at this point that specifications may really
describe in grave detail the 'what' rather than a 'how' activity.

### Specified requirements and prototypes

But that presupposes two things: One - That it's a very loose
specification, again a prototype. It's very important that everyone has
bought into this idea and that everyone is sold on it. They really got
to be bought into it. They really got to understand this throughout the
project. There is still a risk that a prototype will anchor people's
expectations, so you do have to be careful with that even when the
entire team is bought in. The other presumption is that you have to
requirements separately articulated.  

Again, it doesn't have to be like a spreadsheet with your requirements
analysis or it doesn't have to be every single use story broken down and
estimated already, but at the very least you've got to have this stuff
explained and written down and articulated. Otherwise, the specs...what
are they doing? You're giving the how for the what that haven't been
answered yet. 
Can you imagine if you designed a car without knowing what you need to
do? It's great. You're going to build this...I want it to look this
way...I want it to look very pretty. The body has to have this kind of
angle and do this and this and it needs to be here, and then you find
out it was supposed to be an off-road vehicle and the specs are going to
define something that wasn't really appropriate or you knew something
else about it.

Now, you say â€˜well, what if we specified how fast it needs to be able to
go and it's cornering ability, specifying that it needs to be able to go
through this kind of turn at this speed?' Great, you are specifying
requirements. Say what? I thought you just said specs and requirements
are different? Yes. These are very specific requirements that are still
requirements. They form the problem space around which the solution will
be built. They don't provide parameters around the solution itself. That
could be a little tricky, but requirements form the problem space for
which we could create the solution, so specific specified requirements
are just very precise parameters.

Now, the difference is when you have the...it's like taking this little
game that toddlers play where you put the different shaped pegs in the
different shaped holes. These specified requirements are just very
precisely cut holes. They still don't explain exactly how the block will
fit in. You say â€˜well, if we already know the shape of the hole,
shouldn't the block fit in?' Well, if we were just dealing with blocks,
the answer is yes - very likely - but other shapes can fit in there too,
and if the requirement turns out to be that there are different holes
and that the blocks will have to fit in different holes, then perhaps
sizing it exactly with the exact same shape as the initial hole might be
really bad.

{% include image.html src="/images/wooden-blocks.jpg" alt="Wooden blocks. Photo by Flickr user rosipaw https://www.flickr.com/photos/rosipaw/4643095630" %}

That's a little bit of a bad example because we don't assume a problem
space that we have is going to be so big, but it does get to the point
that we don't know ahead of time. So, you  just define what you need to,
and the requirements and the specs, which the entire team works on, you
get input from everyone. You're assuming you need to get information
from every party here, that they're experts, and if they aren't experts,
well that's a much bigger problem. If these are people you don't trust
to get that type of information from, then this is a much bigger
problem. So, that's a bit about specs and requirements differences, and
I hope that when you look at your next project, you start with
requirements.


